---
layout: default
permalink: /use_case_statutory_reporting
title: Social Care Statutory Reporting
breadcrumbs:
  - title: Use Cases
    url: /use_cases
---



<nav class="toc numbered-toc">
<h2 id="table-of-contents">Table of Contents</h2>

1. TOC
{:toc}

</nav>

<article class="numbered-headings">

## Summary

As a local authority responsible for statutory social care reporting, I need reliable, standardised, high‑quality data and efficient processes for generating and submitting statutory returns (e.g. CLD or SSDA903), so that national bodies (DfE/DHSC) receive accurate, timely, comparable information that supports policymaking, oversight, and service improvement.

## Description

**ASC:**

CLD is the primary data collection for ASC and feeds into other returns e.g. ASCOF. Local authorities submit [Client Level Data (CLD)](https://www.ardengemcsu.nhs.uk/adult-social-care-client-level-data/) to DHSC every quarter (with the aim to move to monthly). The CLD specification covers requests for support, assessments, and reviews as well as services provided or commissioned by local authorities. These returns depend heavily on the timeliness, structure, and quality of data captured in the CMS and other systems from within and external to the council.

However, local authorities often record similar concepts differently; definitions are not consistently understood; and many required fields are not captured in a structured way. Additional information sits in finance, commissioning, brokerage, or provider systems, requiring cross-team coordination. Crucially, each local authority applies their own interpretation of the Care Act Assessment, which means that key data points are not immediately comparable and requires data transformation to reflect the CLD specification.

The level of automation for this reporting process varies significantly across local authorities (9% fully automated and 46% mainly automated). Most LAs don’t find the process easy and take an average of 2 days for submission (but can take up to 16 days). Many data teams often spend significant effort reconciling disparate data sources, manually validating datasets, correcting errors, and mapping local activity categories to national definitions.

The Athena Dashboard is a platform available for LAs to access and analyse CLD but it currently appears to have limited use which means that the potential of this data has not been realised for local authorities.

**CSC:**

For CSC, there are three main returns that need to be generated by local authority reporting teams: the [CIN return](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/children-in-need-census), the [903 return](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/children-looked-after-return-2024-to-2025-guide) (both sent to DfE), and the [Annex-A for Ofsted](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/inspecting-cafcass-framework/annex-a-information-and-data-request). Local authority reporting teams will expend significant effort over the year to tidy up data for their returns, with an intensive effort in the weeks leading up to the return deadline.

Unlike adult’s, the returns for children’s are generally consistent and can be utilised as combined datasets to do analysis. Social Finance have developed a range of reporting tools to support local authorities to conduct regional analysis based on statutory returns data.

### Data

**CLD** requires detailed, [person-level ASC data](https://www.ardengemcsu.nhs.uk/adult-social-care-client-level-data/) including:
- Demographic and identifying information
- Contact, Referral & Service Request Data
- Assessment and review dates and outcomes
- Long-term and short-term & reablement support episodes
- Care package components and start/end dates
- Provider information where applicable
- Safeguarding elements (where relevant to CLD specification)

**Key data characteristics:**

- Longitudinal (tracking people over time)
- Event-based (e.g., starts and stops of support)
- Dependent on consistent definitions across teams
- Drawn from multiple internal systems (CMS, brokerage, finance)


ASC returns:

<style>
  .custom-data-table {
    border-collapse: collapse;
    width: 40%;
    margin: 15px 0;
  }
  .custom-data-table td {
    border: 1px solid #666666; /* Adjust color hex as needed */
    padding: 2px;
    padding-left: 10px;
    text-align: left;
  }
</style>

<table class="custom-data-table">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Client Level Data (CLD)</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Adult Social Care Outcomes Framework (ASCOF)</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Adult Social Care Finance Return (ASC-FR)</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Deprivation of Liberty Safeguards (DoLS) Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Adult Social Care Activity and Finance Report</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Registers of People who are Blind or Partially Sighted</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Safeguarding Adults Collection (SAC) Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Deferred Payments Agreement</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Adult Social Care Workforce Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


**CSC**

<table class="custom-data-table">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Children's Social Work Workforce Census</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Children Looked After Return (SSDA903)</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Adoption and Special Guardianship Leadership Board (ASGLB) Data Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Children in Need Census</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Annex A</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Full Annex A</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Supporting Families</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Care Leaver Master List</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Agency Social Worker Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Fostering Data Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

### Benefits/Goal/Value/Purpose

- To fulfil the local authority’s statutory obligation to submit data to government departments
- To ensure the national dataset accurately reflects local activity, enabling DHSC/ DfE to use the data to inform policy
- For local authorities to have high quality, comparable data for benchmarking, care market oversight, service planning and commissioning.

### Processes

1. Practitioners record casework and service activity in the CMS.
2. Additional activity recorded in finance, brokerage, and commissioning systems.
3. Data teams extract, reconcile, and validate data.
4. Gaps and discrepancies trigger queries with operational teams.
5. Manual corrections are applied.
6. Final datasets submitted via portal

## Landscape Review

- CLD replaced previous annual returns (SALT) and is the first national collection of social care records, submitted quarterly. It began in July 2023.
- It is possible to link this data with health on a national scale, enabling in-depth analysis of patterns of health and care use and evaluation of how effective and integrated services are
- Due to the historical lack of national standardisation in ASC, LAs configure their CMS products around local practice.
- Work has been done to standardise language for care providers DiSC - MODS

**Benefits for addressing this use case**

- **For local authorities:** Reduced administrative burden, faster and more accurate reporting, better planning and benchmarking insights. 
- **For the sector:** Standardised data enables more efficient allocation of resources, better oversight of care quality, and lays the foundation for AI and analytics applications. 
- **For people in receipt of care:** Improved reporting and insights support better safeguarding and service planning, contributing to safer, more effective care. 

**Daily APIs to support statutory return data:**

- Outside of our project, there is another project underway at DfE where the creation of APIs to support LA to DfE data transfer to allow a potential move to automated daily returns is being explored with suppliers
- This team has created specifications and may fund suppliers directly to create the APIs required to facilitate these transfers. Tom knows more detail about this programme.

## Out of Scope

## Open Questions

## Additional Sources

## Report an issue

If you spot an issue with this use case, please <a href="https://github.com/SocialCareData/standard/issues/new?template=content_issue.yml&title=Issue+regarding+Statutory+Reporting+Use+Case" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">create a new issue on GitHub</a>.

## Future use cases

If you would like to suggest a future use case, please <a href="https://github.com/SocialCareData/standard/issues/new?template=content_issue.yml&title=Suggesting+a+Statutory+Reporting+Use+Case" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">create a new issue on GitHub</a>.
