---
title: Social Care Statutory Reporting
breadcrumbs:
  - title: Use Cases
tags:
  - MAIS
  - Use Case
reference: UC05
---



<nav class="toc numbered-toc">
<h2 id="table-of-contents">Table of Contents</h2>

1. TOC
{:toc}

</nav>

<article class="numbered-headings">


## Summary

As a local authority responsible for statutory social care reporting, I need reliable, standardised, high‑quality data and efficient processes for generating and submitting statutory returns (e.g. CLD/SAC or SSDA903), so that national bodies (DfE/DHSC) receive accurate, timely, comparable information that supports policymaking, oversight, and service improvement.

## Description

**For Adult Social Care:**

CLD is the primary data collection for ASC and feeds into other returns e.g. ASCOF. Local authorities submit [Client Level Data (CLD)](https://www.ardengemcsu.nhs.uk/adult-social-care-client-level-data/) to DHSC every quarter (with the aim to move to monthly). The CLD specification covers requests for support, assessments, and reviews as well as services provided or commissioned by local authorities. These returns depend heavily on the timeliness, structure, and quality of data captured in the CMS and other systems from within and external to the council. CLD excludes Sageguarding/Dols and assessments and activity under the Mental Health Act 1983.

**For Children’s Social Care:**

There are three main returns that need to be generated by local authority reporting teams: the [CIN return](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/children-in-need-census), the [903 return](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/children-looked-after-return-2024-to-2025-guide) (both sent to DfE), and the [Annex-A for Ofsted](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/inspecting-cafcass-framework/annex-a-information-and-data-request). Local authority reporting teams will expend significant effort over the year to tidy up data for their returns, with an intensive effort in the weeks leading up to the return deadline.

### Primary challenge

For ASC:

* Local authorities often record similar concepts differently; definitions are not consistently understood; and many required fields are not captured in a structured way. Additional information sits in finance, commissioning, brokerage, or provider systems, requiring cross-team coordination. Crucially, each local authority applies their own interpretation of the Care Act Assessment, which means that key data points are not immediately comparable and requires data transformation to reflect the CLD specification.
* The level of automation for this reporting process varies significantly across local authorities (9% fully automated and 46% mainly automated – from a recent CLD survey). Most LAs don’t find the process easy and take an average of 2 days for submission (but can take up to 16 days). Many data teams often spend significant effort reconciling disparate data sources, manually validating datasets, correcting errors, and mapping local activity categories to national definitions.

For CSC:

* Local authorities use a range of practice models and approaches with different language around risk, safety, and welfare.  Many concepts core to CSC are not clearly defined.
* Additional information sits in finance, commissioning, brokerage, or provider systems, requiring cross-team coordination.
* Each local authority applies their own threshold interpretations of the Children Act’s definitions of Child Protection and Child in Need, which means that key data points are not comparable.
* The level of automation for this reporting process varies significantly across local authorities.  Many data teams often spend significant effort reconciling disparate data sources, manually validating datasets, correcting errors, and mapping local activity categories to national definitions.

### Opportunity

* Data and interoperability standards should help reduce the administrative burden of CLD for many LAs and potentially enable the DHSC goal to move to monthly returns for a greater number of LAs
* It should also help improve the quality of data collated and therefore the quality of analysis that could be produced, including linking to other data sources
* It should reduce the burden of reporting on Local Authority data teams, allowing them to spend time on more important work.

### Care record components

A Care Record Component is a distinct unit of information that could be captured within the Case Management System (CMS). These components range from the structural entities required to safely manage a case to the person-centred details that form a holistic view of an individual's life and journey. Relevant care record components for this use case include:

**CLD** requires detailed, [person-level ASC data](https://www.ardengemcsu.nhs.uk/adult-social-care-client-level-data/) including:
* Demographic and identifying information
* Contact, Referral & Service Request Data
* Assessment and review dates and outcomes
* Long-term and short-term & reablement support episodes
* Care package components and start/end dates
* Provider information where applicable
* Safeguarding elements (where relevant to CLD specification)

**Key data characteristics:**

* Longitudinal (tracking people over time)
* Event-based (e.g., starts and stops of support)
* Dependent on consistent definitions across teams
* Drawn from multiple internal systems (CMS, brokerage, finance)

ASC returns:

<style>
  .custom-data-table {
    border-collapse: collapse;
    width: 40%;
    margin: 15px 0;
  }
  .custom-data-table td {
    border: 1px solid #666666;
    padding: 2px;
    padding-left: 10px;
    text-align: left;
  }
  .asc-returns td {
    background-color: #e6f4ff;
  }
  .csc-returns td {
    background-color: #fff9db;
  }
</style>

<table class="custom-data-table asc-returns">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Client Level Data (CLD)</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Adult Social Care Outcomes Framework (ASCOF)</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Adult Social Care Finance Return (ASC-FR)</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Deprivation of Liberty Safeguards (DoLS) Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Adult Social Care Activity and Finance Report</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Registers of People who are Blind or Partially Sighted</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Safeguarding Adults Collection (SAC) Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Deferred Payments Agreement</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Adult Social Care Workforce Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


CSC

<table class="custom-data-table csc-returns">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Children's Social Work Workforce Census</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Children Looked After Return (SSDA903)</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Adoption and Special Guardianship Leadership Board (ASGLB) Data Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Children in Need Census</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Annex A</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Full Annex A</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Supporting Families</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Care Leaver Master List</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Agency Social Worker Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>Fostering Data Return</strong></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

### Benefits

* **For local authorities:** Reduced administrative burden, faster and more accurate reporting, better planning and benchmarking insights. 
* **For the sector:** Standardised data enables more efficient allocation of resources, better oversight of care quality, and lays the foundation for AI and analytics applications. 
* **For the government:** Ensuring the national dataset accurately reflects local activity enables DHSC/DfE to use the data to inform policy
* **For people in receipt of care:** Improved reporting and insights support better safeguarding and service planning, contributing to safer, more effective care. 

## Report an issue

If you spot an issue with this use case, please <a href="https://github.com/SocialCareData/standard/issues/new?template=content_issue.yml&title=Issue+regarding+Statutory+Reporting+Use+Case&category=Use+Cases&page={{ page.url | absolute_url | url_encode }}" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">create a new issue on GitHub</a>.

## Future use cases

If you would like to suggest a future use case, please <a href="https://github.com/SocialCareData/standard/issues/new?template=content_issue.yml&title=Suggesting+a+Statutory+Reporting+Use+Case&category=Use+Cases&page={{ page.url | absolute_url | url_encode }}" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">create a new issue on GitHub</a>.
