---
layout: post
permalink: /2025-11-13-mais-swg
title: MAIS Standards Working Group Meeting 4
categories:
  - Working Group
  - MAIS
breadcrumbs:
  - title: Updates
    url: /updates
---


<nav class="toc numbered-toc">
<h2 id="table-of-contents">Table of contents</h2>

1. TOC
{:toc}
{::options toc_levels="2..3" /}

</nav>

<article class="numbered-headings">

## Links

- [MAIS working group 4 slides](/assets/pdf/mais-swg-4.pdf)
- Miro Board: [251113 Working Group - Holistic Standards Workflow Demo - Miro](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVJvEpp5Y=/) (Password: alltogether)
- [Newsletter signup link]({{ site.newsletter }})
- Github to raise issues/queries: [Data Standards for Social Care](https://github.com/SocialCareData)


## Meeting Notes

### Welcome and overview of our work so far

Harry Angus (Social Finance) provided an overview of the programme's aims, structure, and progress:

- Programme Aims and Use Cases: Harry outlined the initial objectives of the programme, focusing on improving interoperability and outcomes in children's social care by dividing use cases into four main areas: improved data sharing for decision making, data extraction for analysis, access to productivity tools for social workers, and empowering users to access and contribute to their records.
- Programme Structure and Progress: The programme is divided into two areas:
  - Standards development, with a focus on multi-entity information sharing and placements, and more recently including adult social care.
  - Conditions for success, including implementation options. Harry and Andrew discussed ongoing efforts to engage with sector stakeholders, including local authorities and vendors, and the need to balance programme demands with other government reforms, aiming to minimise the burden on implementers and ensure standards remain relevant and actionable.
  - Nicholas Oughtibridge raised the importance of considering different legal frameworks in adult social care such as Schedule 15 which may impact on implementation approaches.
  - MAIS workstream focus: Within MAIS, work has focused on developing a person standard, a data exchange protocol, and enablers including an information governance standard. Work on a matching standard has been paused while we identify whether there may be a better approach that is not standards-based.


### A demonstration of how our standards work together

Neil Majithia (ODI) presented the integration of developed standards—including the person standard, data exchange protocol, and information governance standard—demonstrating their application in a hypothetical workflow and inviting feedback from the group.

Workflow Demonstration: Neil described a hypothetical scenario involving a local authority, integrated care board, and constabulary, illustrating how the person standard and data exchange protocol facilitate identifying individuals and sharing information across agencies, with a focus on machine-readable sharing policies and request handling.

- Person Standard and Identification: Neil and Andrew detailed the attributes included in the person standard, such as multiple identifiers, names, date of birth, and address, emphasising the need for unambiguous identification and referencing alignment with existing standards like FHIR and PRSB.
- Information Governance and Sharing Policies: The focus of the Information Governance standard has shifted from data sharing agreements to more general sharing policies, which are encoded in a machine-readable format specifying permitted actions, data categories, and responsibilities, aiming to support automated and auditable data sharing.
- The demonstration showed how these workflows come together with users able to select a person to request information about, a basis for requesting this information, and whether the request is local, regional or national.
- Technical Paradigms and Future Considerations: Andrew explained the current standards are based on a request-response messaging paradigm. There is a need to explore other models in the future such as publish-subscribe and bulk data transfer.

Breakout Room Discussions: Participants summarised breakout room discussions that addressed restricted records, trust in information sharing, technical infrastructure, and the handling of complex scenarios, identifying areas for further development and clarification.

- Restricted Records and Human Oversight: Neil Majithia reported that his group focused on the challenge of restricted records, emphasising the need for legal and legitimate access, protocols to mitigate malicious use, and the importance of human judgement in the workflow, with plans to further clarify where human intervention is required.
- Trust, Matching, and Centralisation: Harry relayed concerns about the trustworthiness of responses in a dispersed, point-to-point model, the potential need for centralised routing and matching, and the importance of providing sufficient but not excessive information to social workers, who must use professional judgement in ambiguous cases.
- Family-Level Data and Search Scope: Andrew's group discussed the complexities of handling family-level data, defining the scope of searches (local, regional, national), and determining approval processes for search requests, as well as prioritisation and human review of incoming requests.
- Handling Multiple Matches and Messaging: Charlotte's group examined scenarios involving multiple or imperfect matches, the need for clear messaging to maintain trust, and the importance of ongoing review processes to identify and mitigate the risk of misleading information.


### What happens next? Looking towards 2026

Tom led a discussion on planning for 2026, including the need to decide between a use-case driven approach and a more foundational, roadmap -based strategy for standards development.

- Current Approach and Its Challenges: Tom outlined the rationale for the use case-driven approach, which prioritises early value delivery but can lead to unpredictability for vendors and stakeholders, and may not address foundational issues needed across multiple use cases.
- Alternative Roadmap-Based Strategy: Tom proposed an alternative involving detailed analysis of all use cases to identify shared dependencies and foundational requirements, enabling the creation of an 18-month roadmap that would provide greater predictability but reduce flexibility.
- Stakeholder Feedback on Adoption and Implementation:
  - Alistair Herbert and Mark Peterson highlighted the necessity of aligning with existing adoption cycles and the importance of tackling foundational, horizontal standards at a national level to avoid fragmented, point-to-point solutions.
  - Chris Sweeney and Nicholas Oughtibridge highlighted the importance of using of existing frameworks and national assets. Participants agreed on the value of the components developed so far but emphasised the need to address core horizontal standards—such as person identification and case note structure—to enable effective implementation and interoperability across domains.


### Programme Achievements in 2025 and Next Steps

Andrew concluded the meeting by reflecting on the programme's achievements in developing specifications, building community engagement, and demonstrating demand for data standardisation, outlining plans to review feedback and reconvene in January for further planning.

- Achievements and Community Engagement: Andrew summarised the programme's successes in demonstrating it can create interoperable standards, engaging a broad community, and proving the value of open working in the public sector, noting that these achievements extend beyond technical outputs.
- Next Steps and Future Meetings: The team will use December to review feedback and plan next steps, with the next working group meeting scheduled for January, and encouraged continued engagement and input from participants. The team will also be at NCASC for those attending.


## Actions

- Standards development team to log issues raised in meeting on Github, circulating a summary of the issues discussed to the Working Group
- Standards development team to integrate this feedback into draft standards
- Standards development team to agree scope of future working groups and book in sessions for January and beyond

</article>
