---
layout: post
permalink: /2025-09-03-mais-swg
title: MAIS Standards Working Group Meeting 2
categories:
  - Working Group
  - MAIS
breadcrumbs:
  - title: Updates
    url: /updates
---

<nav class="toc numbered-toc">
<h2 id="table-of-contents">Table of contents</h2>

1. TOC
{:toc}
{::options toc_levels="2..3" /}

</nav>

<article class="numbered-headings">

## Links

[MAIS working group 2 slides](/assets/pdf/mais-swg-2.pdf)


## Programme Overview

Tom Rintoul (Social Finance) provided a short reminder on the purpose and scope of the programme.

Tom announced that the standards programme, previously focused on children's social care, will now expand to include adult social care, following agreement with the Department of Health and Social Care. This presents a unique and powerful opportunity to transform social care case management.

Tom described that while foundational standards will be relevant to both domains, future iterations may require separate reference or working groups to address domain-specific extensions, such as care coordination for adults or risk assessments for children.

Tom noted that the immediate impact for the current group is minimal, but participants should expect increased involvement from adult social care stakeholders in future sessions, with broader changes anticipated as the roadmap progresses.


## Person Specification

Neil Majithia (ODI) presented updates to the person standard, Neil outlined recent changes to the person standard, such as allowing multiple identifiers (e.g., NHS numbers), retaining address for identification purposes, and supporting multiple names.

Neil led a group discussions and votes on the inclusion of gender and sex fields and handling on uncertainty in dates of birth


### Gender and phenotypic sex

Neil presented Issue #24 regarding the inclusion of person stated gender versus phenotypic sex, referencing government guidance and sector standards, and proposed making gender mandatory and sex optional fields.

**Vote**: The group then voted on the proposal with the following result:

Do you accept our recommendation on Gender / Sex?
- Yes - proceed to testing = 14
- Not yet - Proceed to testing = 0
- No - further refinement is required before testing = 6

**Group Discussion**: Participants shared experiences and concerns about recording gender and sex in discussion and in the meeting chat. This discussion highlighed the emotive nature, system inconsistencies, and the need for consultation with affected groups key points included:

- Need for Clarity: There is confusion about why both gender and sex data are being collected and if both are essential. Some feedback questions the necessity of including this specific data, suggesting it may represent indirect discrimination if other protected characteristics like religion or ethnicity are omitted.

- Mandatory Data: There's a strong argument that sex at birth should be a mandatory data field, not optional. This is seen as essential for aligning with and matching other government datasets, such as school attendance and census data. It's also noted that sex is a fixed, biological data point, whereas a child's understanding of gender may be less defined.
- Complexity and Sensitivity: The feedback acknowledges that gender is a complex and highly emotive topic. It's recognized that gender is not always binary. The suggestion is to approach this topic carefully, with empathy and a recognition of its complexity.
- Importance of Testing: The majority of the feedback highlights the critical need to test the proposed data collection approach. This testing will help to validate or disprove assumptions, expose and resolve potential data-matching conflicts, and provide more information to inform the final decision. The results from testing should be kept under review, with the understanding that the approach can be refined or changed later if needed.
- Need for Further Consultation: A key piece of feedback is that the current group is not the right audience to make this decision. It is strongly recommended to consult with those directly affected by this data collection to understand what truly matters and to avoid making decisions "for" them.

**Decision**: The group agreed to proceed with testing the proposed approach and to refine it based on the outcomes of this testing and wider policy developments.


### Date of Birth Accuracy Handling

Neil and Howard Askew (ODI) discussed approaches for recording estimated or uncertain dates of birth, recommending an accuracy indicator inspired by the Australian FHIR implementation.

**Vote**: The group then voted on the proposal with the following result:

Do you accept our recommendation on Date of Birth?
- Yes - proceed to testing = 17
- Not yet - proceed to testing = 2
- No - further refinement is required before testing = 2

**Group Discussion**: Participants discussed the proposal it was noted that the proposed approach may not work with the current data models of some systems. Howard confirmed ongoing supplier engagement to assess feasibility.

**Decision**: The group agreed to proceed with testing the proposed approach and to refine it based on the outcomes of this testing and wider policy developments.


## Future Issue Tracking

Neil encouraged participants to raise further issues or comments via GitHub, non-critical issues will be addressed after the identification use case is tested.


## Introducing Data Exchange

Howard, with input from Tom and Andrew, introduced the initial data exchange standard for multi-agency information sharing, demonstrated a prototype API interaction, and led a discussion on matching processes, system interoperability, and the challenges of standardising responses across diverse organisations

- API-Based Data Exchange Approach: Howard described the decision to use RESTful APIs aligned with FHIR protocols for inter-organisational data requests and responses, demonstrating a prototype where a system queries others for information about a person and receives structured responses.

- Matching Process and Validation: Howard and Tom discussed the challenge of ensuring reliable matching across systems, proposing the use of synthetic data for validation and setting minimum standards for matching performance, while acknowledging the limitations of controlling external systems' matching logic.

- Response Structure and Thresholds: Tom elaborated on the need to standardise how systems communicate match confidence, including handling binary and partial matches, and described the importance of describing matching approaches and thresholds in responses for transparency.

- Centralised vs Distributed Matching Debate: The issue of scalability was raised and delegates suggested considering a centralised matching process to overcome the limitations of distributed approaches. Howard inviting further discussion and documentation of this proposal on GitHub.

- Information Governance Considerations: Howard highlighted the need to codify information governance rules in a machine-readable format to ensure organisations can confidently share data, referencing existing guidance and the complexity of local agreements, with plans for a dedicated future session on this topic.


## Introducing taxonomy/vocabulary

Howard, supported by Andrew and Tom, introduced the taxonomy work to create shared vocabularies for organisations, services, and data processing agreements, discussed initial scoping and prioritisation challenges, and solicited input from participants

- Taxonomy Purpose and Scope: Howard explained that the taxonomy aims to enable machine-to-machine communication and build trust by establishing controlled vocabularies for organisations, service involvements, and data processing agreements, starting with priority players identified from previous work.

- Organisation and Service Cataloguing: Andrew and Howard described efforts to catalogue organisations and services, referencing existing directories such as LGA and NHS catalogues, and invited participants to help prioritise which organisations to engage, though technical issues with the voting tool delayed this process.

- Service-Provider Distinction: Members discussed the need to distinguish between organisations, services, and providers, noting that in-house and commissioned providers may require different taxonomy levels, and recommended synthesising existing taxonomies from various sectors.


## Next Steps

Andrew closed the meeting by outlining the timeline for iterating the person specification, data exchange standard, and taxonomy, encouraged ongoing issue-raising and discussion on GitHub, and invited participants to contribute feedback and existing resources..

Future Sessions: Plans were made for deep dives into taxonomy development and a special session on information governance, dates to follow.


## Follow-up tasks:

- Finalise Person Specification ready for testing
- Consider obtaining lived experience input from groups directly affected by gender and sex data recording to inform the person standard.
- GitHub Issue Documentation: Add long-form comments and feedback from the meeting regarding gender and sex data fields and Date of Birth to the relevant GitHub issue thread for further discussion and transparency.
- Assess the impact of implementing the date of birth accuracy indicator on existing case management systems.
- Document and propose a process for verifying matching standards across organisations and publish via GitHub for input.
- Publish taxonomies proposals on GitHub and inform steering group members when these are ready for review.
- Gather and analyse existing taxonomies and catalogues of organisations and services to inform the development of a shared taxonomy for service involvement and organisational registers.


## See also

[Related Discussion on GitHub](https://github.com/orgs/SocialCareData/discussions/6)

</article>
