---
layout: post
permalink: /2026-01-29-mais-swg
title: MAIS Standards Working Group Meeting 5
categories:
  - Working Group
  - MAIS
breadcrumbs:
  - title: Updates
    url: /updates
---


<nav class="toc numbered-toc">
<h2 id="table-of-contents">Table of contents</h2>

1. TOC
{:toc}
{::options toc_levels="2..3" /}

</nav>

<article class="numbered-headings">

## Links

- [MAIS working group 5 slides](/assets/pdf/mais-swg-5.pdf)
- [Workshop Miro Board](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVGLvo-ak=/?share_link_id=145736794265)


## Meeting notes

### In the session we focused on

- An overview of our progress in 2025, and our priorities for 2026. In 2026, we will be focusing on:
  - Foundational standards: Interoperability functionality and core data model
  - 2 core use cases: Multiagency data sharing for safeguarding and wellbeing, and for integrated health and care planning
- The group reflected on the value of seeing the narrowed down scope and key areas of interaction the programme will need to consider, including the National Record Locator
- In the workshop session the group started considering the data that would be required to move from simply identifying a person to building a picture of the person's life, answering the question ‘What do you know about this person?’.
- We explored the attributes if a person, and their life events, relationships and service interactions.
- You can review this work on [the workshop Miro Board](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVGLvo-ak=/?share_link_id=145736794265) and add comments to the board.

### Next Steps

- We’ll incorporate the feedback captured from the Miro and discussion into the GitHub and a first draft taxonomy.
- Our next working group will be on the 26th February. We will cover:
  - National Records Locator Project
  - Introduction to our new focus area: Care Coordination
- This year, we are extending our focus beyond Children’s Social Care to include Adult Social Care. We are therefore looking to bring new ASC representatives into our working group to contribute their expertise. Please forward the invite to the working group to your counterparts working on Adult Social Care.

You can find more information on our current standards [on this website](/) or on the [Data Standards for Social Care GitHub](https://github.com/SocialCareData).

</article>
