---
layout: post
permalink: /2026-02-24-mais-swg
title: MAIS Standards Working Group Meeting 6
categories:
  - Working Group
  - MAIS
breadcrumbs:
  - title: Updates
    url: /updates
---


<nav class="toc numbered-toc">
<h2 id="table-of-contents">Table of contents</h2>

1. TOC
{:toc}
{::options toc_levels="2..3" /}

</nav>

<article class="numbered-headings">

## Links

- [MAIS working group 6 slides](/assets/pdf/mais-swg-6.pdf)
- [Workshop Miro Board](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVG6ASXUo=/?share_link_id=584612184323)


## Overview of the session

### Introduction of Adult Social Care

- This was the first Working Group session where we were joined by representatives from Adults’ Social Care as we push our project beyond just the scope of Children’s Social Care.
- We shared a recap of our journey so far for the new Working Group members and our focuses for this year. We are working across four workstreams: safeguarding and wellbeing data standards, interoperable infrastructure for joined-up care, and core technical standards that cut across a range of use cases.
- We also introduced the Adults’ Social Care workstream, which will be focusing on “joined-up care” to support, for example, transitions between Children’s and Adult’s Social Care, or messaging between hospitals and social care providers. We have identified a shortlist of use cases and will be selecting two priority areas to focus on by the end the month.
- Many of the same core foundational standards are required for both Adults’ and Children’s social care. This Working Group gives us the opportunity to work on social care standards for both in a coordinated way; however, we know that there will be some differences between CSC and ASC, and where we need to separate, we will utilise focused sessions.


### Data Model Deep Dive

While last year we focused on standards to enable sharing identification in MAIS scenarios, we are now focusing on developing a core data model to share care information too.

Based on input from January’s working group, we drafted specifications covering professionals, services, service episodes, life events, and relationships. We also drafted a logical model that helps to explain how these concepts are related to one another.

In this session, we put our drafts in front of the working group, using an interactive session on [Miro](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVG6ASXUo=/?share_link_id=584612184323). This session covered a lot of content quite quickly, going through each specification we drafted and exploring what we’ve missed or where there may be points of ambiguity. We also had a couple of prepared “debate” questions that we held to a vote.

The feedback the working group provided, below, has been written as issues on GitHub. If you have anything further to contribute or weigh in on, please click the links and add your comments; we’ll be using these issues to make changes to the specification over the next few weeks.

### Feedback

- Is it realistic to describe every person connected to another person (eg. their parent, their sibling, etc.) with the rigid `Person` object? Should we instead use a `RelatedPerson` object, at the risk of degrading matching? [Please share your thoughts on the issue thread](https://github.com/SocialCareData/relationship-standard/issues/1).
- Describing a professional’s involvement in a service episode should require the use of some sort of controlled vocabulary, one that is small and focused on the use case for information albeit flexible to ensure full communication of important information. [Please share your thoughts on the issue thread](https://github.com/SocialCareData/service-episode-standard/issues/1).
- Drafts of both Service Episode and Life Event standards have fields to describe “risk”. However, given the many interpretations of risk and vulnerability, and the many ways that risk information can be acted on (some of which can induce harm rather than prevent it), the working group decided that risk is too nebulous of a concept for us to tackle now. [Please share your thoughts on the issue thread](https://github.com/SocialCareData/service-episode-standard/issues/2).
- We should address a conflation in our drafts between ‘organisations’ and ‘services’. [Please share your thoughts on the issue thread](https://github.com/SocialCareData/service-episode-standard/issues/3).

We’d like to express a sincere thank you for all your detailed insights and feedback; we’re excited to continue working with you over the course of this year.

## Next Steps

Over the next few weeks, we will continue to iterate the core data model based on your inputs. We will bring the specifications back to the Working Group as we refine them.

Alongside this, we will be progressing research on technical standards for Identity and Access Management (IAM) and bulk import and export APIs, and agreeing priority use cases & requirements for the joined-up care workstream.

In the meantime, please contribute to the issues linked above or email us directly with any questions you have.

</article>
