---
layout: post
permalink: /2026-03-26-mais-swg
title: MAIS Standards Working Group Meeting 7
categories:
  - Working Group
  - MAIS
breadcrumbs:
  - title: Updates
    url: /updates
---


<nav class="toc numbered-toc">
<h2 id="table-of-contents">Table of contents</h2>

1. TOC
{:toc}
{::options toc_levels="2..3" /}

</nav>

<article class="numbered-headings">

## Links

[MAIS working group 7 slides](/assets/pdf/mais-swg-7.pdf)


## Overview of the Session

We shared an update on the core data model we've been developing with your feedback. Thanks for all your inputs and insights so far. Based on your input in the February working group, we removed mention of risk, added a specification to describe organisations, and sought terminology lists to re-use for involvements and relationships.

In this month’s working group, we sought your opinions on three further challenges: the use of ‘statuses’, how we describe a person’s network of ‘connected people’, and how we adapt our work so far for adult social care. Key themes that came out of the session include:

- Statuses: You told us just how useful statuses are, but also, just how complex they will be to model. We’ve taken your suggestion about their intrinsic links to service episodes forward, with [our proposed change](https://github.com/SocialCareData/person-standard/issues/59). Let us know what you think!
- Connected people: Here, you told us about both the need for information about all kinds of relationships in a Child’s life – including their best friends or even sports coaches – and the need to respect GDPR and the sheer fact that not all information can be expected. We’re building a solution that balances these points with [our requirement to support matching](https://github.com/SocialCareData/person-standard/issues/60).
- Adult Social Care: You vehemently pushed back on the proposal to split Person into Children and Adult. That's something we're happy to put aside; we didn’t want to do it either.

We also gave an update on our Adult Social Care workstream. We are focusing on joined up care, across four priority use cases: multi-agency enquiries, timely notifications for updates, transition from CSC to ASC, and recording and sharing assessments and plans. We want to build a foundation for interoperability in social care that supports future strategic initiatives. To support this, we will be focusing on the following standards: core social care data model; care needs assessment, and care plans.

- The group highlighted the importance of clarity on definitions and the need to ensure consistency across different LAs
- The group also highlighted the need for clarity around planned timelines. We will be coming back to the Working Group with more details on our plans going forward for Adult Social Care.

Finally, we discussed data model prioritisation. We are working to identify which data items are essential to include in any pilot of our standards to share information about a record and shared an initial draft of this. Key themes highlighted included the need to incorporate more around risk flags into our minimum list of data items and consider the different needs of different use cases. We will now be taking this to our frontline practitioner engagement session to get their perspectives.

Thanks for all your inputs and insights – you can review the Miro and add any more comments here.

## Next Steps

- We are now working to update the GitHub with your comments and feedback, alongside our draft data model prioritisation.
- We are also organising a vendor engagement session and frontline practitioner engagement session in April – please let us know if you have any colleagues who should be included in these sessions.

In the meantime, you can find more information on our current standards [on this website](/) or on the [Data Standards for Social Care GitHub](https://github.com/SocialCareData).

</article>
