---
title: MAIS Standards Working Group Meeting 8
description: We began by sharing an update on the three main workstreams that underpin our programme, followed by an open-forum discussion about representing Unpaid Carers within our data model. Then, after a short demonstration of our work on controlled vocabularies, we explored Adult Social Care needs assessments and care plans.
author:
  name: Neil Majithia
tags:
  - Working Group
  - MAIS
  - Joined Up Care
breadcrumbs:
  - title: Updates
    url: /updates
---

## Note
This working group meeting was delayed from April to the 7th of May. In consequence, the following scheduled working group, on the 28th of May, was cancelled, with the next reconvening on the 25th of June 2026.

## Links

[MAIS working group 8 slides](/assets/pdf/mais-swg-8.pdf)


## Overview of the Session

We started with an update regarding the different components that make up this project: **Safeguarding & Wellbeing**, **Joined-up Care**, and a **Social Care Interoperability Framework**. The first two require concerted efforts to standardise and model data to fit our selected use cases, facilitating efficient and timely multi-agency safeguarding as well as the recording of assessments and plans. The interoperability framework, meanwhile, sits across these workstreams as a technical piece that will establish shared standards for APIs and their usage.

After this update, we first dived into the topic of Unpaid Carers and how they are represented in our data model so far. Our data model has some issues with it, but so too does the Adult Social Care Minimum Operational Data Standard (MODS), as per our analysis so far. In discussion, the group told us about the different types of unpaid carers we need to look at, the heterogenous circumstances and situations they’re in, and what kinds of data we need to capture, at a minimum and in an ideal world, to fit the needs of the social care system. Thanks to anyone who contributed.

The next session was a demonstration of how controlled vocabularies flesh-out our data model. We showed you how they enable us to tell stories and noted the many areas in which they’re not quite there yet. We have already received emails with feedback and recommendations of controlled vocabularies to adopt; please keep them coming!

Finally, we focused on assessments and plans, using an interactive session on Miro as a knowledge gathering exercise to understand the lay of the land. We’re grateful for all the sticky notes you put up and the emails that came through afterward. This body of work is going to be a main priority for us in the coming months, so please reach out to us if you have anything you want to contribute.

## Next Steps

In the meantime, our objectives are to ...

- ...identify the best way forward regarding Unpaid Carers
- ...iterate and test-controlled vocabularies and our overarching data model.
- ...continue research and propose approach to assessments and plans.
- ...iterate proposals for the interoperability framework.
- ...finalise next version of our website – to be published soon.

Thanks again for your continued support.
