---
title: MAIS Standards Working Group Meeting 9
description: We introduced our new Programme Manager, Ferry Lichtenberg, to the working group with his update on the overall progress our programme is making towards a pilot. We also introduced the new standards website, then held an in-depth interactive session on Miro that focused on Adult Social Care needs assessments and care plans.
author:
  name: Neil Majithia
tags:
  - Working Group
  - MAIS
breadcrumbs:
  - title: Updates
    url: /updates
---


<nav class="toc numbered-toc">
<h2 id="table-of-contents">Table of contents</h2>

1. TOC
{:toc}
{::options toc_levels="2..3" /}

</nav>

<article class="numbered-headings">

## Links

[MAIS working group 8 slides and Miro](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVHCJtfq4=/) (Password: *standards*)


## Overview of the Session

The session began with an update from Matthieu Bosquet about our new website to host our standards: [standard.socialcaredata.io](https://standard.socialcaredata.io). It’s a work in progress, so not all the standards have been migrated yet, but there you’ll be able to find background details about our work and the use cases we’re aiming to enable.

We also had an introduction to a new team member, Ferry Lichtenberg, who will be the programme manager in charge of seeing our standards through to pilot and implementation. Ferry presented our approach to piloting and the timeline so far. The aim of the pilots is to test our standards in real world scenarios to prove they are viable; we’ll follow up with people who told us they would be interested in getting involved; if you’d like to suggest a place to pilot please send us an email.

The bulk of the session then focused on adult social care, and specifically, Care Act Assessments. Our objective is not to standardise assessments but instead provide an underlying structure for the information captured in them to conform to within data systems to enable improved data interoperability. We presented this objective, then went through our first draft and three key questions we needed your help with:

1. How do we represent communication needs in a standard way, and should we use the PRSB AboutMe standard?
2. Should we have standard fields for contextual, narrative information to conform to?
3. Are standards necessary across an assessment, or just for some core fields?

You can explore the standards and the evidence we presented towards your decisions in the Miro, above. Did you think of anything to add or contribute to these topics? If so, please add to the discussion thread on GitHub: https://github.com/orgs/SocialCareData/discussions/15

## Next Steps

We’ve now got a clearer picture of the appetite for standards overall and, specifically, the kinds of information that you recommend should be shared and the kinds that probably shouldn’t be. We’ll work on iterating our draft and take our learnings towards the other half of the Care Act: care plans. Thanks again for your continued support.  Looking forward to seeing you at the next working group.

</article>
